What is Data Structure?

    Data Structure is a systematic way to organize data in order to use it efficiently.

Type of Data Structures

    Array Data Structure
    String Data Structure
    Linked List Data Structure
    Stack Data Structure
    Queue Data Structure
    Hash Data Structure
    Graph Data Structure
    Tree Data Structure

These are the basic Data Structure we are going to learn, but there are some additional Data Structure we are not cover it here. These are :
        Double Linked List Data Structure
        Circular Linked List Data Structure
        Heap Data Structure
        Matrix/Grid Data Structure
    
    For more information go to this link https://www.tutorialspoint.com/data_structures_algorithms/data_structure_overview.htm

What is Algorithm?

Algorithm is a step by step procedure, which defines a set of instructions to be executed in a certain order to get the desired output.

Types of Algorithms

    DSA - Searching Algorithms

    DSA - Sorting Algorithms

    DSA - Approximation Algorithms

    DSA - Divide and Conquer Algorithms

    DSA - Greedy Algorithms

    DSA - Recursion Algorithm

    DSA - Backtracking Algorithm

    DSA - Randomized Algorithms

    DSA - Dynamic Programming

    DSA - Pattern Searching

    DSA - Mathematical Algorithms

    DSA - Geometric Algorithms

    DSA - Bitwise Algorithms

    DSA - Branch and Bound Algorithm

So why we should learn DSA ?

    * Correctness
    * Time Complexity
    * Space Complexity

Execution Time Cases

There are three Cases which are usualy used to compare various data Structure's execution time in a relative manner

    Worst Case − This is the scenario where a particular data structure operation takes maximum time it can take. If an operation's worst case time is ƒ(n) then this operation will not take more than ƒ(n) time where ƒ(n) represents function of n.

    Average Case − This is the scenario depicting the average execution time of an  operation of a data structure. If an operation takes ƒ(n) time in execution, then    m operations will take mƒ(n) time.

    Best Case − This is the scenario depicting the least possible execution time of an  operation of a data structure. If an operation takes ƒ(n) time in execution, then    the actual operation may take time as the random number which would be maximum as ƒ(n).

Basic DSA Terminologies

    * Data - Data are values or set of values.
    * Data Item - Data item refers to single unit of values.
    * Group Items - Data items that are divided into sub items are called as Group Items.
    * Elementary Items - Data items that cannot be divided are called as Elementary Items.
    * Attribute and Entity − An entity is that which contains certain attributes or properties, which may be assigned values.
    * Entity Set − Entities of similar attributes form an entity set.
    * Field − Field is a single elementary unit of information representing an attribute of an entity.
    * Record − Record is a collection of field values of a given entity.
    * File − File is a collection of records of the entities in a given entity set.